We've discussed atrial fibrillation a lot in this course,
especially when we were talking earlier about Apple Heart Study and the Framingham study.
In this lesson, we're finally going to learn what AFib actually is.
As we've discussed in a normal heart rhythm,
the sinus node generates the impulse that causes the atria to contract.
Then this impulse is propagated to the AV node,
which then spreads to the ventricles causing the ventricles to contract.
This results in a very regular looking waveform,
and this is called sinus rhythm.
In atrial fibrillation, instead of the sinus node being
the sole location that begins the depolarization of the atria,
there are multiple locations around the atria
that will generate an impulse spontaneously.
Each of these impulses causes partial contraction of the atria,
but no single impulse depolarizes the entire atria.
So we don't really see a coherent contraction of the atria.
Instead, it kind of just passes.
Occasionally one of these impulses will reach the AV node,
which will then cause the ventricular contraction,
but because all these atrial impulses are occurring haphazardly,
the ventricular contractions will also occur randomly and irregularly.
This is what an EKG looks like when it's in atrial fibrillation.
The first thing you notice is that there's no P waves and that's because there's
no coherent atrial contraction causing
a big enough electrical disturbance to show up as the P wave in our EKG signal.
Instead, we see this fibrillating wave in the baseline.
The other thing we notice is that
the QRS complexes are occurring at very irregular intervals.
So in the beginning they're close together and
then they get far apart and they come close together again,
and the heart rate can be fast or slow during atrial fibrillation,
but it'll always be irregular.
We mentioned earlier that atrial fibrillation is
associated with an increased risk of stroke,
and the reason this occurs is because the atria are not contracting completely,
and so stagnant pools of blood will form in the atria.
These pools can then form blood clots,
which may get circulated into the bloodstream.
As these clots pass through progressively smaller and smaller arteries,
they may eventually obstruct blood flow to the brain and cause a stroke.
So now we've seen how the atrial fibrillation occurs
physiologically and why it's a potentially dangerous condition.
Let's build an algorithm that automatically detects
atrial fibrillation from the EKG signal.